I wrote the Death Committee, and it was not a great bestseller, and... The rabbi, you said, was 26 weeks on the New York Times.
26 weeks on the list, yeah.
And the rabbi was published, I'm just thinking, when we met at the end of that, it was published in 65.
Yeah.
And that's cool.
Okay, okay.
And then I wrote the Death Committee.
I seem to remember that the Death Committee was on the Times list for one or two weeks only.
Mm-hmm.
But, you know, it sold pretty well, and it was a Literary Guild selection and all that stuff, and picked up by the Reader's Digest and the Reader's Digest book.
So, you know, it was a successful experience.
The Jerusalem diamond thudded in this country, and I'll tell you why I say in this country.
All along, I got picked up by a few foreign countries, all along with every book.
And the only country that I ever refused was, several times I refused publication in South Africa, because in those days there was apartheid, and I didn't want to be published there.
But the rabbi, I got a German contract for the rabbi.
Don't forget, this isn't that long after World War II.
I'm a Jew.
But I said to myself,
Isn't it wonderful?
God, I want a book of mine called The Rabbi, published in German.
But then when it came out, they didn't have the guts to call it The Rabbi.
They called it A House for the Lord.
And I was absolutely teed off.
And they changed the title.
They changed the title without my consent.
It wasn't until years later when my present publisher, Dremer Knauer, published everything that I've ever written.
And they've all been bestsellers in Europe.
that they published it under the title The Rabbi, so I was very pleased about that.
But then, I'm in the hills, and the books number two and three were not the kind of success that the first book had been, and I take a long time between books, and we're in the hills, and I waste two years on the only thing I've ever tried that I didn't publish.
which was a spy novel, a lousy spy novel.
And I guess that's the answer why I should never try to write something I'm not really interested in, because I don't like spy novels.
So why did you try it?
Because it was time to write another book.
I had kids to feed, and I came up with the only idea that was there at the moment.
And meanwhile, staring you in the face is just your knowledge of medicine and science.
Wait, wait, wait.
So what happened was I tried this
the spy novel, and I threw it away.
Two years work.
Two years is unbelievable.
You literally trashed it?
Well, it's in a drawer someplace.
It's in a drawer someplace.
No, I still have my master's thesis, which is unpublishable, but I still own it.
And Lorraine and I looked at one another, and we loved living there.
And she said, look, try another book.
And we didn't have
By that time, we had a nice house and three growing kids, and I needed a source of income.
And she said, try another book.
Try another book.
And if it doesn't work, you're going to have to get the best job you can find.
And I figured, here comes another newspaper, but you can't work on a newspaper and live in Nashville, Massachusetts.
And I sat there, and I thought of this medical novel and sent it off to my agent, which is where we pick up the conversation.
And this is still the same agency?
They're still the same agent.
And name her once again for her?
Pat Chartle.
Okay.
Now Pat Chartle, Myra.
And just, I know we spelled it very, spelled it early, early on.
S-C-H-A-R-T-L-E.
So what I'm transcribing.
She was a fine agent, yeah.
And so this book was The Physician.
And who did you sell this one?
And I sold it to Simon & Schuster.
Okay, so you've got McGraw-Hill.
The second book was... Random House.
I did not stay at the same publishing house.
The third one was Simon & Schuster.
So you really haven't developed, pardon me for jumping on that kind of a close rapport with a particular editor.
No, but let me tell you what happened.
And I'll tell you in the same vein that you told me what happened at Random House, but there are some things I would just assume not, you know, start an ancient war about.
What happened was I went to Simon Schuster.
I had the best editor I've ever met in my life, maybe outside of my daughter.
She's really a good editor, but he really was a terrific editor.
And his name was?
And his name was Herman Golub, G-O-L-L-U-B.
At just the wrong moment, he left to become editor-in-chief at Doubleday.
At exactly the wrong moment, my book was about to come out.
Excuse me, I don't have that date.
Don't worry about it.
65 is the day.
The day of publication.
And Herman was a really fine editor.
I mean, a good manuscript man, you know, a good editor.
Line editor.
He's a good editor.
He's a really fine editor.
And when he left, what actually happened was I got turned over to a guy named Fred Hills.
I don't want this in, and I trust you.
Fred Hills lied to me from the very beginning, told me he had sent
things out to other authors for quote never said I've heard this so often never never sent a letter Ted Wiesner up in Portsmouth and they did the same thing well well listen this is right in the beginning and I caught him at several lies within two days and you know what I said to him because it was obvious to me what was happening I couldn't I couldn't be out of there they had me I said I never want to talk to you again for the rest of my life and I never did
And if he had to contact me, he went through my agent, if I had to contact him, and the book was a disaster.
They sold something like 10,000 copies.
And I was distraught.
I had worked The Physician, which is a blockbuster all over the world, you know.
Well, we have to say... Five million copies.
Well, we have to say that there were problems with your... Well, what you can say... That you don't care to get into... No, I would appreciate it if you don't.
Let me offer you a suggestion and see if you can buy it.
Because I told you... There has to be some explanation for the fact that it belonged in the U.S.
Yeah, you can tell them that I... Do it this way.
We can tell them without telling them because you can tell them...
You can quote me, direct quotes, as saying, I had always heard that when one becomes an orphan, you know, it was a disaster.
My book was orphaned, you know, as far as the editor was concerned.
But I found that it really made a great difference, and the book did not do well at all in the United States.
You can say this.
And what year was this?
This was during my watch.
This is going to be late 70s, early 80s.
You can call my agent and he can fill you in.
Because by that time, several things happened.
So I left my editor.
Also, Pat Charvel got married and left me, left the business.
You're a double orphan.
I'm a double orphan.
I was really distraught.
I'm going to use that quote, a double orphan.
Well, I was.
And...
It's something I've never gotten into with a PWP, so I'd like to... Yeah, and at my request, Jing went up and talked to Simon & Schuster, and because the book wasn't selling, Joni Evans was happy to release me for my obligation for my next book.
You know, and that took care of Simon Schuster.
Really?
She was happy?
Well, I mean, I assume that.
Now, was the book doing great in Europe simultaneously?
Well, this is what happened.
Not simultaneously, but almost simultaneously.
It would have prompted them to take another look.
A little bit after.
Now you've already been released.
I've been released.
And a guy comes from Europe named...
Carl Blessing, Carl Heinz Blessing, Dr. Blessing.
Pardon me?
Excuse me, he's a doctor, and it's K-A-R-L, middle initial H, Blessing, B-L-E-S-S-I-N-G.
And Carl sees a little notice in the catalog, the S&S catalog.
Comes twice a year to buy books for his backlist, American books.
And he says, that's interesting, reads the book, falls in love with it, takes it back, the whole company fell in love with it, you know, Jerome Knauer.
And what he did was he backed it to the hilt.
In contrast to what was happening in America, he ordered 5,000 reader's copies, paperback, free reader's copies, gave one not only to every bookstore manager, gave one to every book clerk in Germany.
Wow.
You know?
Now what's the name of the publisher again?
Dromer.
D-R-O-E-M-E-R.
Okay, right.
Okay.
There's no umlaut.
No umlaut, but K-N-A-U-R.
No dash.
No, no.
Just Dromer, Knauer.
And, and, um, and the book, uh, first... Do you know the year approximately?
I don't know if I've asked you just a couple of times.
This is huge.
This is a year approximately.
We'll get to it.
Let's go on.
Okay.
Yeah, I can get it.
I probably have a copy here somewhere.
Physician in Germany.
Yeah.
Lorraine, when was the Physician first published in Germany?
Do you know?
Let me know.
Okay, thanks.
You're a good kid.
What title?
The Physician?
They published it under the title Medicus, which means the physician.
How do you spell?
M-E-D-I-C-U-S.
Okay.
M-E-D-I-C-U-S?
Yeah, D-E-R.
D-E-R.
Dere Medicus.
And it means the physician.
Okay.
And then, you know, Kyle would say, it's doing wonderfully through, and it just went off the charts.
You know, it just... And it was unbelievable to me, because, you know, I had tasted this with the rabbi, but there had been a long...
drug in between so it was really lovely lovely lovely and and he asked us over and and i and lorraine and two of my children met us there and we we had a wonderful first uh visit you know let me back up just a bit how did dr blessing become aware of the physician he saw a little right up in the in the uh
Simon & Schuster catalog, and said, that's an interesting thing.
I'd like to look into that.
Read it.
Talk about just fortuitous little things.
Yeah, yeah.
That was published in the United States in 86.
Okay, U.S.
86.
And Germany in 87.
So the next year.
Yeah, it was the next year.
Right after I had bombed in America, he bought it, and it became an explosion in Europe.
You were talking about just a 10-year phenomenon.
Yeah, but then what happened was,
It spread because it went from country to country.
And I've got to tell you this, because this is interesting for PW.
In Spain, they bought it, probably largely on the success in Germany, and it bombed.
The first time they bought it, they got a lot of returns.
People just didn't know about it, you know.
And this will show you fortuitousness in the book business.
One of the book managers was ill.
gets up at two o'clock in the morning, can't sleep, says, what the hell do I have on the shelf, reaches out, grabs a book.
It's their book, you know, their copy of The Physician, which has just been returned by the, you know, Carlos.
He didn't stop reading until he read every last word and then began going in and saying, you gotta take this again, this is a great book.
That was on one level.
On another level, there's a medium-sized store
in Barcelona, an independent bookseller named Maite, M-A-I-T-E.
And Maite, she goes by just that one name, Maite fell in love with the book and is a very aggressive woman.
And every time somebody came into the store, this is literal, she would grab them and say, I've got a book and you can't leave unless you read this book.
You've got to buy this book.
There's a plaque in her store
because in the very beginning she saw something like, honestly asked Lorraine, something like 4,000 books.
I don't know how many, we'll have to check the, you can call and ask when you talk to her, but between my day and this manager who saw the light, I was number one before the book took off in Spain, and since then all of my books have taken off in Spain, and the two
awards that I've won in Spain, the two Silver Bass Prizes, are popularity contests, really.
They're not done by juries.
Second numbers.
Yeah, yeah.
So that's what happened there.
Meanwhile, in this country, we go to Dutton, my present publisher, which published
After the physician.
Shaman.
Shaman is next.
And we go to Dutton.
So I say to Dutton, I don't think this is telling tales out of school, it probably is, but I said to people at Dutton, why don't you take on the ad saying, oh, because my work had already become, you know, greatly received, hugely received in Europe.
So why don't you take on the ad and say, oh, already,
an international bestseller.
They said, can't do that.
Somebody actually said this to me.
Their marketing people decided that people would think it was a European book, not an American book.
This is a book about the American Civil War.
Right?
But this time, they
Thank God for this book.
But now you've reached the point where you're publishing in Europe before you're publishing in the States.
Is that right?
Is this the first time this has happened?
No, last time was the first time it happened.
So basically... The last two books I published in Europe first.
Which ones now?
Shaman and this book.
Okay, so these last two books.
Yeah.
And do you consider yourself something of an expatriate, right?
Or do you remember maintaining that?
No, no.
First of all, I don't grieve because that happened.
I honestly think that I'm going to sell again in the United States the way I sell in Europe.
But I have never grieved about it because I think you can understand this.
It's such a precarious...
profession that when it happened all over the place in other countries, that was gratifying enough so that I'm an American writer, I live here, I work here, I want people to read me here, but it was so gratifying that it was happening someplace else and I'm happy.
Now, I want it to happen here, you know, I'm not saying I don't, but
But I've gotten so much joy and fulfillment out of other countries.
And at first I said— I just can't think of any other case where this is—any other instance where this has happened.
Can you think of anything else?
No, I don't.
I mean, I really don't.
I know other writers do better overseas.
Yeah, but American writers?
There are some American writers that do better overseas.
And they do here.
Yeah, my agent could tell you if he—and he told me a couple— Did you have any new agent to come out of the room?
Eugene Winnick, W-I-N-I-C-K.
W-I-N-I-C-K.
McIntosh and Otis.
And God, I've called that for so many years.
I should remember the number, but let me look at it.
I'll give it to you.
You might as well have it.
It's area code 212-687-7400.
Okay.
And so...
there was something, oh, and it's been wonderful because at first I said to myself, well, maybe it's just that something I write, something in my psyche, the German readers respond to, you know, except it's happened that way, you know, in Spain, wildly successful, number one, you know, Brazil, bestseller-dom in Italy, you know, and I published
to an enormous number of countries now.
Can you tell them that as a result, every book you've written?
Every book you've written?
Yeah, including the weak failures in America, you know, the Jerusalem Diamond, the Death Committee, everything has been a bestseller in Europe.
And all these books on the bestseller?
At the same time, I had five books on the list.
This is in Germany.
But it was, you know, I don't know, 15 or whatever list.
And Shaman was the top selling, gotten European book, book in Europe.
I think they said Shaman was
So what's wrong in this country?
Can you have a clue on this?
Well, I think... Do you think the marketing can be a little more aggressive?
Well, well, no.
I don't know what you have to say on the record, but... Well, for off the record, I'll tell you what it is in this country.
I don't want to be quoted, because immediately four publishers are going to say, no, stuff stinks, that's why we didn't do it, if you say this.
We're a genre, as far as fiction is concerned, we're built around genres, you know?
They publish.
mainly i'm not saying that they don't know american publishers american publishers publish uh murder mysteries now there's a murder in my next book but not because it's a murder story you know that's sometimes part of life but but i'm talking about the genre books murder mysteries used to be westerns they're still somewhat alive
The big thing is romance books.
Look at that.
If the big thing was science fiction, there'd be a spaceship on the cover.
And everything is geared to, what did your last book do?
Business people run the companies now, no longer.
Editorial people, they can't afford to go with their hunches.
So they look at your last book.
I've got a book at Simon & Schuster, sold
10,000 copies.
They're not terribly interested in me, you know?
Now, then I have a book, Shaman, didn't sell well.
They're not terribly interested in this book.
Now, they are, because now things have gotten so big in Europe that I have been talked to by publishers.
I don't know how much we want to say about that.
But now, for my next book, I'm in a very good position.
The book following this one?
The book following this one, you know?
And you told me already, I think, what that was.
Did you tell me what it was?
It's The Secret Jew, a book about the Inquisition.
It was novel about the idea in Spain.
In Spain.
And what's happened is not only gratifying from the sense of someone who sits in a room and writes and doesn't know what the hell's going to happen to it and has had success and failure both, but it's been wonderful.
I had never been to Europe
I had never been to Europe until that first trip to Germany.
Now we've been to a number of countries.
We've met a number of people.
They all respond to this work by an American writer, and it indicates to me that they may like more garlic or less garlic or more of this or less of that, but they're all interested in the same thing.
They're interested in their kids.
They're interested in a world at peace.
They're interested in jobs for their children and security and education for their kids.
you know, and a job for themselves, and the economy, and a place to live.
We all have the same, the very same needs.
You certainly, because you don't, you can't even read the editions that most of these are published in.
You can't read the languages and the translations, but you know, because you've written the story, but are you mindful now of these, of an international audience when you're writing?
Are you still writing the same way you want to get?
No, I'm writing the way I've always written,
which is to please, honestly, honestly, because I think this is the only way anybody can ever write.
It's to please me.
And then she'll read it and maybe we'll fight about something.
My daughter will read it and an editor.
But I don't write for her or my daughter or the editor or the person in Spain or in Italy or in Germany or in Bulgaria or wherever the hell it is.
Really and truly, I write the way you write.
You want to please me.
I feel that it's a tremendous advantage to me that all my life I've been a really hungry and enjoying reader.
Because I write the kind of book I look for.
I try to write the kind of book I look for.
And I think that any writer has to be a reader.
Who do you read?
Everybody.
Literally everybody.
We buy a lot of books.
use public libraries.
You know, I'm an old library trustee, and I have terrific admiration for the libraries we have in this country, which a lot of European countries don't have, you know.
That's great.
Yeah.
So, that's... You know what, I think we've probably... You've got enough?
Well, these are the points that I wanted to hit.
Okay.
And I'll just get home and start transcribing.
Well, I'm here by phone.
And you're here by phone, and you can do me some good in negotiations.
And it's okay if you don't, because I've been a journalist too.
My pleasure, please.
Okay.
I think that the best situation, you know, the ideal situation is for a writer to finish a book and then market it.
And that's the way I have preferred to work with, you know, several books.
So basically it's one book?
And then have a contract, yeah.
Oh, so you actually sell the book when it's done?
That's what I would prefer it to do.
As opposed to selling the book?
Yeah, that's what I did last time.
You didn't sell a book idea, you sell it.
I sell the book.
And this is what your procedure has basically done?
Not every time.
I've had contracts, yeah, but that's what I would prefer to do.
However, this time I probably will sign a contract because I'm being... Pursued?
Pressed.
Yeah.
Because, you know, there are publishers who... You're persuaded by others.
I'm being persuaded, but I'll probably sign a contract.
I think it would be good if you don't go into that.
I'll tell you what this is about.
Just tell me the context that we're talking about here in general.
I'll tell you what it's about.
Well, I think in general I would prefer to write the book, you know, and I now can afford to do that, thank God, and get it to your satisfaction, and then
you know then you know and they know exactly what they're going to get there's no gambling and and you know you're in a good position to market it but uh off the record what what is happening is that the the company that i have been so successful with in germany has had an internal uh splitting uh one man has gone to the other giant house in in germany bafflesman
They're both pursuing me, you know.
Yeah, so as my agent said, it's a nice problem.
So he said... Tell me the name of your current publisher again.
My current publisher is Jeremiah Knauer.
So he said, Gene said, Noah, if you can, I'm telling you boldly and frankly, my agent said, if you can drop into the thing somehow that you're
you know seriously considering signing a contract for this book both sides are going to be very interested in considering you mean signing contracts for my next for this before writing it before writing it see like this book is finished before he sold oh i see and you are and you are you're not you're not under contract anybody right now for the next work no oh it's like move on with the and what happens and what happens is i have
Well, it's a good position to be in business-wise.
It's a tough position to be in because I have friends in both camps.
You've got to do what's best for you.
You've got to do what's best for you, of course.
So that's going on now, and it might be over by the time this comes out, but it might not be.
I'll read this to you.
If you talk to your agent, you might tell him to expect a call from me.
Okay.
I'll call him today.
And if he has things about figures and stuff.
Well, the best place to get some really astounding figures
is from Claudia Limmer in Germany.
But he'll give you other figures.
Gene will give you whatever you need.
But Claudia, you should, if you will, if you call both Claudia Limmer and Silvia Quirini in Spain, they can tell you something.
The best time to call them is very early in the morning.
You can fax them.
I'll give you both of their fax numbers too.
Okay, wait a minute.
Yeah, because then you're not wasting your money.
Yeah.
Well, I'll put it.
It doesn't matter.
It's better to call them, I think.
As long as they speak English.
And Claudia just got a good new job as Director of Public Relations to a non-fiction house, so I'm not going to be working with her anymore.
But she'll be there until the end of the month.
Okay.
Now, you've never had, you know, through all this discussion this morning, you never once had you mentioned any kind of a close relationship with an editor.
It doesn't sound like you've had.
It sounds like your books basically have been project-driven.
Well, they've been project-driven, but you know what happens?
Lorraine is the best copy editor I've ever met.
She knows her grammar.
She's majored in German and French.
And Lisa, who had spent 10 years as a supervising editor at Houghton Mifflin, is a... I mean, you know, I've got a terrific resource.
But truthfully, his work doesn't mean much better to you.
It really doesn't.
He works so hard that he changes.
But everybody, even beyond a rapport with somebody, like I would go to the ends of the U.S.
with Alan Peacock because he rescued me.
He's the only one who came forward and said, and he said, you know, this is my